[Music]
good afternoon and welcome I'm Carol
Crist I'm the Chancellor Berkeley and
it's a delight to welcome you to this
event this afternoon
you're here to hear a conversation which
has the title the future of humans gene
editing and the unthinkable power to
control evolution that title to me
recalls the anniversary of the 200th the
200th anniversary of the publication of
Mary Shelley's Frankenstein in 1818
Frankenstein is the prototypical text of
the human ability to create new life and
it's really a prescient text
particularly at the moment when
scientists have the power to manipulate
the blueprint of life
this is a bold topic and a perfect way
to kick off a Berkeley sesquicentennial
which we're celebrating with the
official model Fiat looks or let there
be light this motto inscribed in the
university seal and on the five pointed
star that adorns Sather gate reminds us
that it's our duty to create new
knowledge and bring it to light to
illuminate solutions for the world's
greatest problems and find solutions for
bettering the human condition as we
celebrate a hundred and fifty years of
light at Berkeley and we anticipate a
hundred and fifty years of light in the
future the discovery of CRISPR by
Jennifer Doudna and the global impact
that this will have comes immediately to
mind through few breakthroughs in
science have had the kind of sweeping
immediate impact that CRISPR has
bringing monumental change the way
scientists approach key questions of
life and holding unlimited promise for
the future it's exhilarating to imagine
the transformations we'll see as the
result of this technology in the coming
years our special guest dr. mukajee is
an oncologist at
a University and Pulitzer Prize winner
for his book the Emperor of all maladies
a biography of cancer
his most recent book the Jean and
intimate history chronicles the history
of the Jean Jean and what becomes of
humanity when we can read and edit our
own genetic information a rhodes scholar
he has earned degrees from Stanford
University the University of Oxford and
Harvard Medical School dr. Jennifer
Doudna has been a member of the Berkeley
faculty since 2002 and is the founding
executive director of the innovative
genomics Institute a joint endeavor of
UC Berkeley and UCSF and I'd like
particularly to welcome UCSF Chancellor
Sam Hager to this program
[Applause]
since her days as a graduate student and
postdoc at Harvard and the University of
Colorado Jennifer has always been
interested in structural biology and the
biochemistry of RNA in 2012 she can
compact a colleague emmanuel sharp on
chez discovered CRISPR and that's a
game-changer
it holds potential to cure genetic
diseases overcome climate change and
address global food security among many
other transformational applications dr.
Daoud s contributions her light are
significant and worthy of celebration
please welcome Jennifer Doudna and dr.
mukajee
[Applause]
well thank you Chancellor crimped for
that very warm introduction and thank
you to all of you for for coming today
we're really looking forward to this
conversation we will talk for about 45
minutes and then we'd like to open up
the floor to questions to answer
thoughts and ideas and give you a chance
to share those with us so I'd like to
start off by by pointing out that you
know humanity has always had a desire
for improvement cars improved
transportation penicillin improved
health the internet approve improved the
spread of information or misinformation
in that some cases now it appears that
we're entering a new stage of
improvement artificial intelligence to
improve efficiency self-driving cars to
improve safety and the improvement of
our own bodies so we have to truly ask
ourselves what are we improving do we
need improving and even what is
improvement so gene editing technologies
and cancer therapies are forcing us to
look at these questions and also to look
at ourselves cancer for example is a
natural and common cause of death
genetic diseases are too numerous to
count and a natural result of our being
human a new wave of biomedical advances
are giving us the ability to push back
cancer and erase genetic diseases but
but at what cost so I'd like to start
this conversation by asking you dr.
mukajee are we transitioning from
natural to unnatural or is this just the
next step in human evolution so again I
think the question of what natural and
unnatural is or our has been really
brought about in the last decade or so
in a way with an urgency that really
didn't exist before Oscar Wilde famously
said being natural is sometimes just
opposed and the question is how are we
posing what what what pose are we on I
do think that
the capacity to change something as
elemental as our own DNA even if it's in
somatic cells certainly in stem cells
and certainly in in embryonic cells
really raises the question about how
what we're doing with our own evolution
these are unprecedented technologies
because they allow us to hold the horns
of our own destiny in some ways even
though we understand destiny is more
than DNA but a powerful element of
destiny is in DNA you gave the example
of cancer and genetic diseases so really
the question of what is natural what is
unnatural the boundaries I think have
been redrawn or are being redrawn today
my own thoughts about this really are
the thoughts of a physician that's my
brain might I have a physicians brain
and that is that as we do this as we
enter this arena of new technologies it
seems to me that there are and I talked
a little bit about this in the gene that
they're a triangle of ideas which we
should keep in focus
the first one is when we intervene when
we are intervening on human genetics is
their extraordinary suffering involved
you and I can then open up a debate
saying well what is extraordinary
suffering but at least there is a sense
there's a hard line that we draw and say
that in a when we move forward that the
that that remains a certain line in the
sand that we invade on what is natural
versus our natural only when we think
that there's extraordinary suffering
involved in a second I'll tell you that
the people who don't buy this argument
right I'll tell you what we'll talk
about that in a second
but that's one line of the triangle the
second line of the triangle is loosely
I've called it in the book I've called
it penetrance I've called it the ideas
we can call it certainty that when we
make genetic changes when we do tamper
with evolution particularly with our own
own evolution that we have a strong
degree of certainty that there's a
powerful relationship between the gene
and phenotype or the or the ultimate
manifestation that's involved so things
that we
uncertain about things that have effects
that we don't understand cascading
effects like tropic effects we probably
should avoid since obviously we don't
want to intervene on things that we
don't ultimately we cannot ultimately
control and the third line of the
triangle is is is is I've called a
justifiable choice people have used
different words for it and that is that
when we intervene between what is
unnatural what is natural that the
intervention bears some justification
that we can justify it that it and that
it's that it's not done by state mandate
that individual choices involve people
people are able to do it or not able to
do it as they should choose now it
doesn't take an extraordinarily
complicated bit of thinking to realize
that each of these is fuzzy territory
who defines extraordinary suffering who
mandates choice who decides you know if
the world if our culture's push us
towards manipulating our children is
that really a choice even if it is if
it's a passive choice has really become
a choice different cultures make
different choices for instance exactly
and you know just to give you you you
know better than anyone else the rules
that apply for interventions on embryos
in China are not the rules that apply
for intervention in the United States
and other cultures so so I fully
understand this is complicated territory
but as we move forward if we don't if we
don't draw some stakes this is going to
become I think a even more complicated
than it than it is so it is absolutely
true that we're drawing we're passing a
boundary between matched between the
natural and beyond our natural those
were those terms were never easily
defined never easily definable but the
technologies allow us to they're forcing
us to define them and and my argument is
that we should use a kind of more
sympathetic way a humanistic way to try
to breach those boundaries yeah
what what do you think in fact some of
these recommendations have been made
you've been on panels that have been
that made these recommendations for
interventions of human embryos what are
your thoughts about about these the
breaching of the of the natural well I
well you
talking I was thinking that you know at
the we had a meeting in 2015 in the Napa
Valley that was the first meeting is
organized by the innovative genomics
Institute and UCSF to think about the
ethical and societal implications of
human genome editing and there was a you
know it was a fairly small group of
people we had two of the scientists who
have been involved in the 1970's
discussions in Asilomar about the ethics
of molecular cloning Paul Berg and David
Baltimore and even in that group of
scientists there was a very active
discussion around the table heated at
times you know people really disagreeing
and debating about in particular about
human embryo editing so making changes
that would be become inherited in future
generations and that what would be the
implications of that and at one point
somebody leaned across the table and
said wait a minute there might become a
moment there might come a moment when we
will consider it unethical not to do
that at least for certain kinds of you
know and it's like you're saying about
you know if there's severe suffering due
to genetic disease this might in the
future be something that we would you
know our societal II agree should should
proceed so my own views you know it's
interesting for me because I have found
that my own views have been evolving yes
I think about this a talk talk tell us
about the evolution tell us yes I you
know I started off you know when I first
started thinking about the implications
of gene editing back in you know in sort
of the early days of this work which was
actually only a few years ago now and
started thinking about this I I felt
initially very opposed to using gene
editing and in embryos not necessarily
forever but I certainly felt that the
time wasn't wasn't now to proceed to do
that and why did I think that well I
just didn't seem to me you know it
seemed unnatural you know it seemed
something that you know you're sort of
messing with something that maybe you
shouldn't mess with and as a scientist I
also appreciate that in many cases
Jean and you know this better than
anyone probably but you know a gene that
we think does has a certain function
might only play that role in a
particular context of other genes so how
can we ever really be sure that's
something where we're altering might not
you know have unintended consequences
and that would have consequences in not
only a person but all of their kids and
their kids kids you know and it seemed
it seemed kind of a profound thing but
what's happened over the last few years
for me and you know for those of you
that don't know me so I'm not you know
I'm a biochemist and I've always done
very fundamental research so I'm like
unlike you said I you know I've always
just been working on molecules rather
than than patients or people and but
what's happened over the last few years
is that I've been coming into increasing
contact with people that have genetic
disease either themselves or in their
families I recently got an email and
this is very typical for me these days
but I got an email from a woman who
explained that her her beautiful young
boy has a genetic disease that had just
been diagnosed and she sent me a picture
of this little baby in his his little
little carrier you know and it's cute
and and and you know it was just it
broke my heart it really broke my heart
and I I just I guess I've found myself
recognizing that you know when there is
severe suffering and we have an
opportunity to change that it may be
worth doing right well you know one line
that philosophers have tried to draw is
between emancipation and an enhancement
and they have tried to draw a strong
line between emancipation of course in
real practice once you practice medicine
the those lines also become fuzzy what
is you know what is emancipation for one
person can be enhancement for the other
some the extremes are quite obvious it's
very easy to think about extremes you
know manipulating genes for cosmetic
purposes seems you know very obviously
far outside the realm of what we want to
do with but on the other hand there are
certainly examples where where the
conflicts are more real I mean the
question that occurs to me I'm gonna
frame the question and then maybe
divided a little bit one question that
occurred to me while I was thinking
about this is you know we're always in
medicine straddling the line between
treating and curing sure but now we are
beginning to think about altering DNA as
a mechanism or a means to treat and cure
is that reasonable and maybe you can
speak about it in sort of three
categories it's divided up as you wish
but it seems to me that there are three
broad categories number one is editing
genes of other organisms very widely
speaking so all other organisms and
that's like saying humans and all other
organisms but but really they imagine
the entire you know the question of
editing genes and other organisms and
crops and plants and pests the second is
somatic gene editing so particular
things I'm a transplant ER so in the in
in stem cells blood stem cells are the
kinds of stem cells and the third of
course is gene editing and either sperm
or eggs or embryos so tell us about what
you think the prospects are in these
three categories and and and is it
reasonable what is reasonable what's
unreasonable maybe in the three
categories or pick pick one of them
which is most provocative for you well
so I think I think you're touching on an
important point and that is that gene
editing is is used now widely in a you
know sort of across the biosphere I
guess you could say you know it's really
being used in plants animals its
enhancing the pace of research it's
opening up organisms for study that in
the past really could not be
investigated at the genetic level that
so it's you know it's a very exciting
time really as a biologist I think to be
you know living in the midst of this
transformational opportunity with with
new technologies and it's not just gene
editing it's other things too of course
that are converging to give us ways that
we can manipulate organisms that were
unthinkable in the
pass so just having the ability to
sequence the entire genome you know all
the DNA and us in the cell of an
organism and and start understanding
what all the what that code means well
how it how it dictates what an organism
becomes this is really profound I think
that you know so just to quickly touch
on the points that you those three areas
so so if we think about using gene
editing in organisms other than than
humans clearly this is going to have a
big impact on on humanity right because
it'll allow us to change plants for
example to be more nutritious or to grow
in environments that where they
otherwise wouldn't thrive is Kito's get
rid of mosquitoes
maybe maybe or at least controlled
spread of disease by insects and you
know and then in terms of editing what
you're what you referred to as somatic
cells and just so that everyone's on the
same page with that that term just means
that we're editing cells that are not
not not germline cells meaning they're
not cells that are eggs or sperm or
embryos so they don't cause heritable
changes in future generations of
organisms but this could still be
incredibly impactful for the clinical
application of gene editing in the type
of research that you do for example
right being able to edit let's say
immune cells so that they're more
effective at targeting cancer would be
would be amazing if we can do that
editing blood cells so they no longer
carry the disease-causing gene for
sickle cell anemia would be would be
incredible and there's many many other
examples like that then the third
category is the one that is more kind of
ethically fraught which is or could be
which is you know should it be okay or
is it okay to make changes in the
germline of humans people are believe me
scientists are already doing this in the
germ lines of other kinds of organisms
quite routinely but in humans no not not
yet and and should we should we go there
and I personally think that that it that
will that it's going to happen and it's
probably going to happen because of the
fact that you know different cultures
view this question differently and I
think we're seeing already that
in a scientific world that the pace of
research at least on human embryo
editing is proceeding differently in
different countries so just a quick
follow up on that question and then we
can move on but how long till the first
transgenic human oh dear I'm on the spot
here I don't I don't know is the short
answer I think that you know just again
just so that everyone out there sort of
understands what's happening I mean we
saw just in the last six months there
have been two very prominent
publications in scientific journals from
highly respected research labs one here
in the United States and one in the
United Kingdom who both showed that you
could use gene editing in viable human
embryos to change to alter the genome to
make a very precise change to a
particular gene in these embryos and it
has been some question about there's
been questions about the details of how
that's working but I think the the
overarching you know thing that I take
from that is that this this this
research is proceeding and it's going to
it's going to I think the pace will
accelerate I recently heard from a
colleague in China who is coming to
visit me here at Berkeley next week who
is wants to give me an update on his own
research in human embryos so you know
it's it's it's moving forward I can't
tell you when I think it'll be actually
used to create a CRISPR baby for example
but but I think we're seeing steady
progression in that direction I mean
just to give you one example I work with
blood stem cells and immune cells that's
most of my my leukemia biologist
leukemia doctor as of last week we were
just talking about this earlier on as of
last week in cord blood stem cells we
are getting edited gene editing
successfully in 90% of the stem cells in
fact we've gotten to a place where not
we're worried worried wondering whether
we should even sort these cells because
the the efficiency of sorting is getting
to the place where the efficiency of
editing so that so basically I suspect
that the blood system is open for
business the entire blood system is open
for business we we there's many many
questions off target effects whether
they will get weird leukemias that arise
because we've you know made and I read
it in the wrong place but essentially
speaking it's it's staggering we
couldn't do this six months ago this is
this is a very important point I mean
the field of this sort of this
technology and all the things are being
done with it are moving forward
incredibly quickly and one of the things
that that's been on my mind is how do we
how do we explain to people that are not
in in the you know down in the weeds
doing the work working in the clinic or
working in the laboratory
I'm explain what's happening because I
think we appreciate that this is
ultimately going to affect everyone's
life and I think that one of the ways
that you know people learn about science
they learn about technology is actually
through through the media through
Hollywood through books of course and
through through fiction and nonfiction
but they you know they sort of start to
understand what's happening we're seeing
this with of course artificial
intelligence has been all over the media
lately and self-driving cars and things
and a little bit you know genome editing
is sort of creeping in there so I wanted
to ask you what you think Hollywood has
done well and and what what if they what
have they done poorly and and how do we
how do we how do we work with people
that like to tell stories and they do
that for a business and for you know
professionally and work with them to get
science right well it's it's it's always
a struggle one of the strangest
experiences of my life was being a small
consultant on Logan
it's true if you if you were to sit
through the final minutes there I have a
small band that's because the I think
I'm speaking correctly you know I barely
enter this particularly Hollywood world
but I was approached by a friend of a
friend of a friend who showed me the
script and I said well you know this
script is really fundamentally about a
dystopic vision of what happens when
human beings start reaching for certain
kinds of perfection it it pushes it
pushes towards the enhancement to it
debate away from the emancipation debate
and my only thought about it was I say
it's not disturbing enough and I think I
think that in so so there's there's a
moment in that film which actually
what's in very early version of there's
a moment in the film when you suddenly
realize there's a moment in which the
characters are walking through a
cornfield or something and you suddenly
realize that the entirety of the world
has now been transformed for human
benefit because the corn is growing ten
times as high I think that was my input
in the film as I'd make it more
disturbing but just to remind us just to
remind ourselves that I think I think
the media has a big responsibility here
I think explaining that I think again it
would be very helpful for us from the
media to get a roadmap of what the pulse
of public thinking about this is because
the media reflects back to a large
extent what a much larger public view of
all of this is that would be what's
helpful not to set guidelines not to
tell us about the science often
but to tell us you know and that's what
I think is important about the films the
film a get the science wrong they may
get it too far off etc etc what they
often get right is they get the pulse of
what people's fears are what are they
afraid of the most what are the concerns
what are they excited what are they
excited about you know a film like I'm
just thinking of off the top of my head
a film like Lorenzo's oil is a great
example we could disagree about the
science we know that it's very
complicated
people had disagreements agreements but
what it got right very much was the
obsessive hunting of a parent for a cure
for their child that's what it gets very
right and as long as the pulse is right
it reminds us it keeps us I think as
physicians as scientists honest about
what we're writing about what are the
concerns were you know sure we're
talking about powerful technologies
who's gonna draw the limits how are we
going to how are we gonna you know how
we're gonna move forward and I think
that's what that's what the ultimate
that's what ultimately helps it keeps in
some ways Hollywood gets it right when
its moral compass is right when it sets
our moral compass right Hollywood gets
it wrong when it tries to you know tell
us about science I suppose in a way
that's - you know it just doesn't make
any realistic sense so for me like I
thought the movie the Martian was a
great film that really kind of captured
the excitement of an adventure and the
challenges that one might imagine
happening if you tried to actually
survive on Mars and and it's sort of
just you know beyond where we think we
are right now in terms of technologies
but it I think it you know I noticed
that it captured a lot of people's
attention and imagination and you know I
have a teenage son and just you know
hearing his chatting about this with his
friends and you know you could just kind
of sense this this sort of buzz so I
think films like that are great because
they they actually they maybe you people
think about science they
they think about the the opportunities
you know if we develop technologies that
might allow us to explore our solar
system in ways that we haven't been able
to but sometime in the next few years
there's going to be a fictionalized
version of a Jennifer Doudna movie what
would you what would you what would you
like to ensure is in that film if the
Ender is not in make it exciting well
you know again I guess to me I like it
when films capture the passion that
somebody has for work they're doing for
you know the sort of the struggles I
mean you know I think you know as
students now will often ask me you know
I I feel almost a little bit embarrassed
because I think they think that I'm you
know sort of reached them some pedestal
or something and I don't think of myself
that way at all I think of myself
growing up in this little rural town in
Hawaii and you know struggling through
general chemistry in college and trying
to figure out can i really be a
scientist and and you know and I I I
think a movie to be true to if it wants
to be true maybe doesn't but you know if
it really wanted to capture anything
that's true about me it would have to
show those struggles and and it would
have to you know show the you know it's
again it's kind of back to the human
spirit isn't it it's about you know all
of us I think you know we have passions
for certain things and that's one of the
things you learn in college is you kind
of learn about yourself and what you
find exciting and you know for me it was
about you know realizing that I was just
a person that loved to love to think
about molecules you know I love to think
about how how life works at the level of
molecules and and so I you know but but
it's it hasn't been a straight path at
all and I would definitely want a story
to capture that and and just just tell
us about and tell us about a lot has
been written about you know the the
initial series of conversations that you
had with the man well
it was at the start of this tell us
about the actually I've never read about
the the kind of moment was there a
moment when things crystallized for you
well I think I think there have been
been a few of those I mean you know when
I think back on take one pick one pick
one okay well probably that I should
pick the first one then which is really
when I met her and you know we met at a
meeting in 2011 it was a meeting I you
know almost didn't go to because it was
a meeting for microbiologist which is
certainly not me and and I was busy and
I was teaching here at Berkeley and I
was you know juggling all the usual
things that we juggle and I almost
canceled it but then I I decided to go
and it's good that I did because that's
where I met Emanuel sharp and TA and and
she is a microbiologist so she had good
legitimate reason to be there and when
we met at this meeting we met there
because we were both working on what at
the time was a very obscure area biology
namely understanding how bacteria fight
viral infection using a system called
CRISPR
it's an adaptive immune system in
bacteria and so we were both giving
talks of this little session at this
meeting and afterwards we went out to
lunch you know and we started chatting
and we started walking around the old
cobblestone streets of Old San Juan
Puerto Rico and in that conversation you
know we talked about starting a
collaboration to work together to figure
out the function of one protein just one
protein that's part of this immune
system a protein called Cass 9 and it
was a project that really kind of you
know brought together expertise from her
lab as a microbiologist and my lab is
biochemist and I do remember feeling a
real sense of sort of the hairs on my
neck standing up because I could I could
sense that there was something very
exciting about this project and you know
in in some ways the rest of it is you
know it's kind of a I can tell you my
story about that story is that I heard
about from up from of all people in the
world I heard about the your early
results from Paul Berg I was I went to
Stanford
for another visit I have collaborators
there I trained with Paul and Paul as
Paul had as you very much know there it
was among the many people who discovered
how to clone make recombinant DNA
stitched to pieces of DNA from two
foreign organisms together and was
instrumental in the Asilomar meeting
which was an important milestone in all
of this and I would once in a while like
since becoming a physician and a
scientist myself I'd go back to Stanford
and I would always have lunch with Paul
and these were you know very precious to
me and he's now 90 years old because
this was about when he was 87 or
something and he told me you know I just
heard a seminar from someone and she
talked about a an enzyme that allows you
to modify DNA in a site-specific manner
and I thought my god the old man has
finally lost it
[Laughter]
because it was it was it was a little
unfathomably people had been thinking
about this a long time and it was a
little unfair move and of course the
fact that it was borrowed back from
bacteria would just to move the
conversation along flipping over the
question of Hollywood is a very
pertinent political question today which
is we are living in times where we the
amount of distrust for science is
phenomenal and I have to tell people
constantly that science is not fake news
that there's a strong line between one
and the other evolution is not fake news
bacterial evolution is not fake news so
what do we do about this moment I mean
do we have a responsibility there are we
have really an unprecedented moment in
human history in American history a
country that grew to some extent
politically out of scientists and
engineers the the history of this
country I'm an immigrant so the history
of this country is a country that grew
out of the aspirations of humanists
scientists engineers
what do we do about the student what are
you doing Jennifer what how does the
world look to you I'm very concerned
about this I think I think it's a it's
it's a big challenge I think we have to
start by encouraging scientists
everywhere to get out of the lab at some
at some level and and engage in
conversation we have to we have to talk
about science we need to bring science
back into the kind of the you know
discussions that we have at cocktail
parties and things like that I think
that that you know books like like like
your your books I think are doing a lot
to kind of you know I think you're very
good at telling stories that are very
human and that people can identify with
so they don't necessarily think about
you as a you know I mean hopefully they
I'm sure they think about you as a
scientist but they read the book because
it's really interesting it's really
engaging right it's not a text book it's
something that is very human and I think
the more that we can do that and show
people that you know and use language to
describe scientific ideas that isn't you
know isn't filled with acronyms and
there doesn't sound like a foreign
language but we try to really just
explain ideas because I think in the end
a lot of the ideas that we're having and
thinking about are not really
complicated they're not it's just you
know the maybe the details are but I
think the concepts and ideas are not and
this is something that we just have to
work at more than I think we have in
certainly in my lifetime as a
professional scientist what would you
how would you answer all I can't agree
more I think there is I think what I
worry most about is that there's a
dispiriting quality for young students
for my students there's a dispiriting
quality in in all of this and the the
dispiriting quality lasts generations
it's not as it's not why it's like I'd
say it carries through and I think this
is an especial time
you know I'm not gonna say it's not it's
not go hug a scientist day but but I
think there's an especial time when we
need to remind ourselves that that the
contributions of science to this debate
to this car we look at for instance look
at climate change we need debt before we
have arguments and converse it we need
data data comes from laboratories from
scientists who spend time gathering it
we need to respect that idea that we
don't we can't enter these debates
without data so so just be just be
careful be cognizant of the fact that
yeah the scientists in your life around
you are Industry spirited and try to
encourage them a might be
philanthropically it might not be it
might be personally but it's it's it's a
tough time for the graduate students and
their postdocs in my lab I don't know if
you're famous
so has your has your your work and
especially maybe your writing has that
led you to have conversations and
interactions with new groups of people
that you you know that have sort of
taken you in new directions well
certainly politically yes I mean Emperor
as you know you know the ones the fur my
first book on history of Kent on cancer
it was was well read but then Ken Burns
made a documentary out of it the gene is
also going to be made into a documentary
by Ken Burns you should probably not
tweet that until it's formally announced
will be announced in a week or two so
but we're in the middle of filming in
fact we filmed you Jennifer and so I
think that the transition into serious
documentary these are three hours or in
the case of emperor six hour
documentaries allowed us to reach a
certain group of people
I think one of the most interesting
conversations that I've had recently is
with people who work on you know
education for children how do you how do
you take textbooks which are which are
becoming more and more outdated in some
to some ways how do you convert that
into education for children how do you
make it possible to put that on the web
to some extent but supplement that with
with books that are more readable and
that's one initiative that I'm very
interested in how do you make a kind of
simultaneous storytelling as well as as
didactic education for AP for instance
which is much more accessible and
doesn't remain you know the boring old
textbook I think kids are actually a
great way in - you know I had this great
experience a couple of years ago where I
you know I my son was in seventh grade
at the time and he was just taking a
class they were teaching the kids about
DNA and so the teacher asked me what if
I would come and talk to the kids a
little bit about my work and so I went
to the school and we did it after school
so we just it was just voluntary we just
asked the kids you know who would like
to do it and for my first shock was I
walked into this room thinking there
might be two three kids there were
twenty kids there and 15 of them were
girls it was cool yeah and the other
thing was so I thought okay how am I
gonna get these you know twelve year
olds interested in what I do so I
thought well I'll take this this 3d
printed model that I have of the cast
nine protein it's actually made by Jacob
corn who's here in the audience here at
the innovative genomics Institute it's
printed on a 3d printer but it's based
on an actual crystallographic structure
of the cast nine protein which is the
scissors that cuts the DNA and the RNA
molecule that programs it to find and
cut a particular sequence of DNA that's
what makes it a powerful tool and then
the DNA itself getting cut and so I took
this model it's about this big it's
about you know sort of a football or so
I took it in and the model was designed
by Jacob very nicely
that it can be pulled apart you can
actually pull the DNA out you can see
where the DNA got cut I should have
brought it would have been fun but but I
took it to the kids and I thought well I
won't
I won't actually take it apart I won't
to show them actually how it how the DNA
gets cut because that might just be too
complicated for the kids so I have this
model it but it's brightly colored and
you know it looks kind of cool and so
the kids said well can you pass it
around so I started passing this thing
around and I was describing it to them
within five seconds of course right they
had pulled it they're like oh look cool
the DNA comes out hey we can pop this
piece often you know they were
dissembling it and they were looking at
it and you know they were figuring it
out and they were asking tons of
questions and actually they asked a
number of really interesting ethical
questions I think one of the kids at
that that little meeting asked me about
the ethics of not really not really
using that language but asked me you
know what what does this mean for
changing embryos you know humans and
doesn't that mean that you know you
could you could decide to make somebody
taller or smarter or you know Wow and
you know just kind of grappling you
could see the thought process going so I
really think that the more that we can
reach out to kids because kids are I
think kids are natural scientists you
know they love they love questions and
the more that we can do that and get
them engaged they don't think about
science as a as a thing you know it's
just it's just sort of you know it's an
it's it's something that's interesting
that's entered their world should we
should we be getting very four questions
we want to turn it over to questions
from the audience but I want to before
we do that I just want to I want to
cover one more thing with you Sid and
that is I would love to hear the
motivation that you had for writing your
first book because I think you know for
me the Emperor of all maladies you know
your first book about cancer and it
really is a profound work it's very very
in some ways very depressing but it's
also incredibly interesting to look at
the history of you know how humans have
grappled with this this this really
intractable disease I'd love to hear
what you what you what motivated to do
it what was most surprising to you about
that process and what was it fun was it
hard
tell us about that so you know I hadn't
I had never thought I would write a book
I was trained as a physician scientist
very nose to the ground and the Emperor
of all maladies really grew out of a
patient's question and the patient's
question was she was in the middle of
chemotherapy for sarcoma and she said
why are we doing this and where are we
going and it seemed to me just
astonishing that here was this disease
that has occupied our culture you know
it is cancer has become more than a
disease it is a metaphor it is an
allegory
it is a people just use it to describe
states of mind
very few illnesses in human history have
ascended to this kind of space in human
culture so and yet we had no real
history we had no book about it in the
same sense people had written about
cancer in a thousand ways there were
million text books on it so that was
really the beginning of that book I
started as a fellow in and I would work
do in during the day I would we be in
the clinic and in the evenings I would
write and it was just a journal to start
with and they grew and grew and grew and
at some point of time I decided that I
would show it to a publisher and someone
said to me that you know they're gonna
be you know you know they were there
with two readers for that book your
mother in you 600 pages on cancer you
know when it was first when it was first
delivered it was like someone said it
was like a phone directory from in the
days that there used to be phone
directories a phone directory from hell
it had a black cover in the back it had
in white it had cancer written on it and
it was 18 hundred pages long and cut
down to 600 pages so that's how I
started that was my that was my first
book fascinating yeah
sounds hard working in the clinic during
the day and writing at night wow I'm
amazed that you could do that and and in
your second book so well-received as
well and you know many people have read
the gene that I've run into just sort of
randomly but but also you know you you
encountered some criticisms about the
book tell us about that experience
what's the main again it's the
experience of distilling very complex
science too simple you can't satisfy
everyone this simplification is
absolutely necessary you in the first
draft again it was it was delivered in
1800 or pages it had to be cut down to
600 now I have to do most of the cutting
and so things get left on the floor
things have to be cut to cut off and
left on the floor
so you know you have to have a radical
simplification in many places and people
don't scientists don't like being
simplified they don't like they're
working simplified but in order to
communicate with with a much wider
audience you have to take away
terminology take away even people too
many names becomes word salad readers
get switched off if you use too much
terminology people get switched off so
that's one so there's you know the
criticisms of a mission is one area the
the controversial one of the
controversial parts the book involve
questions like race and IQ and those I
really thought that for this for this
book it was it was odd this was before
long before these questions had become
very central so there's a chapter on
race and a chapter like you both of
which were read by people I respected in
the field actually Marcus Feldman over
at Stanford who you know very well was a
very important person who read the race
chapter and race the chapter nah he was
was also read by many many people in the
psychiatric community I really felt that
those were important to put in in
retrospect I feel even more strongly
that they were important to put in but
their disagreements about some of these
fundamental questions so you know it's
part of the
it's part of the territory yeah
absolutely
maybe maybe I'll continue this since
we're speaking about books and words you
know I'm very sensitive to the idea of
words around the words like war on
cancer battle on cancer some some people
some patients don't like it one woman
famously said to me you go fight the war
you know this is not a word that I want
to own others want to own that what it
somehow helps the the idea of them
fighting something in their own body
such them what you feel about the word
gene-editing what you feel about the
word you know the various words tell us
what the various words have been and
what did you coin yourself how do you
use you what is a book what do you say
yourself when you use these words
genetic surgery has been used to
describe this what's your sense of any
of this yeah I think you know we've seen
it interesting I've noticed a kind of an
interesting evolution in language around
gene editing so it started off as people
would pretty much universally call it
genome engineering right genome
engineering and and this kind of came
about I think due to their you know they
were obviously CRISPR was not the first
way to modify genomes there were earlier
technologies for doing this and they
really were engineering in the sense
that you actually had to engineer
proteins individually to make targeted
changes to DNA and cells and that
involved a lot of work and a lot of you
know you know engineering in the lab
engineering proteins and and then with
when when CRISPR came along initially
this the same language was applied to it
but but what's happened and it's you
know and this wasn't me at all this was
sort of just sort of happened very
organically I think in the field is that
people began to adopt the language gene
editing why well I think that it's
because it sort of reflects the maybe
simpler nature of this technology
in the sense that it doesn't require a
lot of engineering for this tool to be
employed in I think it started sometime
back around the time that we had the
first international conference in
Washington at the end of 2015 on
gene-editing and I think we used that
language for that meeting and maybe at
some level that you know started to
started to you know permeate the the
language that was used to describe it in
other contexts but I started to ask
people well why you know white people
like George church you know do you use
why do you use you you know when do you
use editing and when do you do this
engineering and I think it was George
that said well you know I really think
that the new ways of modifying genes are
much more like editing than engineering
because we don't have to engineer
anything to do this we can just use the
tool right and and do you think moving
forward do you think this term will
stick is it is it easy for you now to
use this do you find it there's a
facility with it I think so I mean I I'm
curious to know you know and I try to
ask this question of people that are not
scientists you know ask them you know
how they react to that what does that
mean to you if someone says gene editing
does that mean anything or does it just
you know is it opaque but I think it's I
think it's fairly descriptive of what it
is that we're really doing because if
you think about it it's really a tool
it's really a technology that's all
about rewriting DNA right we you know
we've been able to synthesize DNA so we
can we can we can write it we can erase
it we can cut it and paste it and now we
can rewrite it and so I think it really
is sort of analogous to having a text
editor that you're using on the genetic
code one of the astonishing things I
don't know how many people have worked
with the CRISPR has nine system one of
the astonishing things as a user in in
human biology is how simple it is it is
very very simple and maybe that's part
of the captured in this in this in this
idea of gene editing it seems to me you
know one one thought I had is that for a
long time I
to figure out how it would help us share
purity in cancer you know of course to
elucidate targets in cancer genetically
manipulate cancer cells it's really
really simplified but could we use this
therapeutically in cancer and I
struggled with that for a while and of
course the answer has now come to us
it's you can't necessarily use it in
cancer cells because evolution is
working against you you know you have to
essentially get it we think in a hundred
percent of the cancer cells otherwise
the ones that have not been edited will
evolve and take over maybe you can do it
over and over again but the fact that
the immune system has now become quite
clearly one of the mechanisms of
controlling cancer and immune cells you
can manipulate and edit and thereby
reintroduce them so it's really given us
a a powerful way to think about cancer
not from the standpoint of cancer itself
but from the microenvironment around
cancer a couple of questions that arise
one is it seems to me that editing sperm
and eggs or sperm and egg making cells
is going to be easier than doing it in
the entire embryo what do you think are
the prospects of that and and is that
something do you see yourself as your
own lab ever moving in that direction
making sperm and egg edited sperm and
eggs human sperm and eggs so you know I
think you're absolutely right that my
and I you know disclaimer is that I'm
not a I'm not a human developmental
biologist by any stretch but I think
that you know from what I've come to
understand from talking to people that
are experts in this area I think that
that this is absolutely coming you know
that it's going to be possible to and it
sort of it's going to obviate the
question of editing human embryos
because you won't mean to write you
won't need to you'll edit the sperm and
eggs and you know would I ever do this
in my own lab no not not for any reason
other than that's not the kind of
biologist that I am you know it's not
the kind of expertise that I have but I
I think that you're right that you know
the in terms of thinking about future
clinical impacts this is an area of very
active
where there's likely to be real advances
it seems one piece of conversation we
were having earlier which is an
important threat to pickup is that it
seems that a lot of the conversations
have focused around gene-editing
but we're also seeing the simultaneous
development of other other technologies
you mentioned one of them embryology
stem cell biology and the third one is
is artificial intelligence deep learning
I have a couple of thoughts about deep
learning and and genetics particular
from the standpoint of cancer but I'd
love to hear your thoughts as well one
thing that occurred to me was deep
learning is beginning to elucidate
things about our genome that I did not
think possible before I read this
fascinating study of early
cardiovascular disease so if you take
cardiovascular disease and you ask the
question how many patients with early
cardiovascular disease can be explained
by single gene mutations so and this is
how we grew up as biologists we thought
about mutation in a gene affecting a
pathway thereby causing the change that
leads to a disease right very classical
model very classical genetic model of
thinking and cardiovascular disease you
know familial hypercholesterolemia you
get elevated cholesterol you have all
sorts of problems this study looked at
if you take a hundred people only two of
them two of those hundred can be
explained by these sort of powerful
single gene mutations that will increase
risk the question is what about the rest
what about the other 98 and for a long
time we didn't really know how to solve
that problem my colleagues in sort of
complex genomics tell me now that deep
learning is beginning to solve these
kinds of problems that in fact it turns
out that complex human phenotype can
often be explained by what I would call
not shout not shove effects so you know
those single genes were like shops
they would push you strongly in one
direction but by nudge effects often
hundreds or often even thousands of gene
variants that nudge you towards you know
have small effect in and of themselves
but as a network or maybe as in in the
context move you even a little bit even
slightly towards your ultimate Lea so
the question really arises is that if
that's going to be the case with most
human diseases and does gene editing
help with nudge effects can you imagine
ways or it should be will it only help
with shove genes are we going to reach
some kind of biological limit as it were
to the capacity to manipulate human
fingers it's a complicated question so I
don't know what your thoughts about that
well I have two thoughts about that I
mean one is that I think that CRISPR and
sort of gene editing technologies that
are you know coming from that are going
to help with nudge effects in the sense
that they're gonna help us uncover all
the genes that are in those networks
right and that's already happening so
there's lots and lots of laboratories
now they're using gene editing not in
the clinic but they're using it to
understand the genetics of human disease
and they're doing it both in human cells
and organs which are cultured you know
bits of organs that you can grow in the
lab as well as in animal models of
disease so I think that's gonna be a
very powerful way and and frankly I
totally agree with what you're saying
about using artificial intelligence or
machine learning to help us understand
those networks because they're often
complicated right we have to you have to
really understand all the players that
might can be contributing to a
particular trait for example but the
other way that I think that gene editing
will potentially have an impact
clinically in the future and we're not
there today but I think you know the
technology is going in that direction is
being able to edit or modify multiple
genes at once and you know sometimes
these genes are with it well sometimes
these genes are found in very disparate
parts of the of the genetic material but
sometimes they're actually co-localize
immense pace and there's more and more
that's being learned about how that
works in sells and so I'm thinking that
in the future it may be possible to you
know use gene editing to alter multiple
genes at once maybe to remove whole
segments of a genome that aren't
necessary for certain kinds of
developmental pathways for example in in
particular cell types I think the
opportunities for using it as a real
tool of understanding of the genome are
still really very much out there to be
captured so let me turn the question
that you asked me in the beginning of
the conversation back to you what does
the phrase human evolution mean to you
in 2018 what is the phrase human
evolution mean to me in 2018 I think
that was changed for you well I think
we're on this incredible continuum of
you know it's a it really is an exciting
time I feel many days I just sort of
feel a sense of wonder you know I feel
amazed that I'm alive at this time when
you know we're sort of at this moment
when all these technologies are coming
together and for the first time we can
do things we you know like like we said
like in Chancellor christe's
introduction you know that we really
have now the power to control evolution
it's not just not just in principle our
own that's obviously still kind of you
know on the bleeding edge but but but to
control evolution of other organisms and
are in our environment and I think
that's a it's a really profound
opportunity and a profound
responsibility so I hope that we can all
you know work together and work as
you're doing to educate people about the
science behind this so they can think
about it and really contemplate this
it's possible to have an international
moratorium until we decide this is it
conceivable no
no it's really not because you know as
we discussed earlier I mean I think you
know culturally there are just many
differences in the way people approach
these things and how would you enforce
such a thing but I think what one can do
is engage in discussions that are
international invite people to share
their views try to understand where
they're coming from and I think that's
what universities you know should be
doing we should be encouraging that and
being the you know really leading that
that conversation not dictating it but
just inviting it and and welcoming
different points of view so I would like
to now open up the floor for questions
because I know that some of you may may
have questions and we'd really like to
hear what you're thinking and try to
answer them so will we have runners with
microphones that are coming around and
will if you raise your hand they will
call on you and we will bring a
microphone to you and who's doing that
who's calling out the okay like the
lights are in our faces excuse us if we
that's right turn to you late yes I do
just hi thanks there's a great talk my
question is sort of quick I'm just
wondering like what have been the three
most influential / favorite books for
both of you well and it's interesting
that you asked because we were just
saying today this week I think is the
50th anniversary of the double helix Jim
Watson's famous and at one point I'm
infamous book which actually was really
a trailblazer for me as a young reader
showed the human process of science
warts and all
and I was I was very influenced by it I
was also influenced as a young reader by
I'm a I was very influenced by Orwell
all the warworld's books were very
influential to me in fact it influenced
my thinking and then I would say I
I've decided in writing the gene I
discovered someone I had weirdly
neglected and I wrote about him recently
in an essay for The New Yorker
Chesterton now you could say well what
about Chesterton and Jean in fact
Chesterton wrote very deeply about
eugenics he was one of the great
skeptics of eugenics I discovered his
writing much later and realized that you
know there's something wonderful about
his very bracing skepticism about
eugenics so those would be three books
sort of picked out of a basket of
thousands no Jennifer fascinating well I
have to say I have to say that the
double-helix also for me was incredibly
influential I mean at that that book was
probably the first book that I read you
know back when I was in grade school
about about science and it kind of blew
my mind you know if you vet for those of
you who read it you know it's really a
very personal history of the work that
Watson and Crick and their colleagues
did to discover the structure of DNA it
was really very eye-opening for me and
really made me think about becoming a
scientist for the first time and then
the other two might surprise you or
maybe not one is I would have to say
that John McPhee reader I don't know if
anybody here knows John McPhee but he's
a fabulous writer and he writes about
all sorts of topics and what he does is
he basically travels around and talks to
interesting people a lot of them are
scientists but some of them aren't and
he writes about it and I found his
writing to be incredibly captivating and
interesting again sort of in my
formative years and then more recently I
read a biography of Dorothy Hodgkin that
was also just fantastic and you know
learning about her life and she had made
she had multiple kids and she was
working at a time when it was very
difficult for women in science in
particular and she prevailed you know
she she won the tool belt prize and you
know she did really just incredible
groundbreaking work so I that book was
also just a incredibly inspiring three
there's a little note in the gene
actually met Dorothy Hodgkin years ago
there's a little note in the gene where
when she won the Nobel Prize the the
subtitle in one of her photographs was a
housewife from Sussex or wherever shield
[Laughter]
hi I think I'm the next questioner where
are you and to us wave to us you talked
earlier about the cultural differences
or the cultural the difference in cults
in cultures in terms of their approach
to the opportunity responsibilities of
gene editing and can you kind of talk a
little bit more about China or other
parts of the world and what their
approaches are and I think that's an
interesting piece for the public to
understand where things are going in
other parts of the world and what your
opinions are about what's happening in
other parts of the world
well you take that one first well okay
so so there's you know and again this is
really just my personal observations
right but I think that what I what I've
noticed is that I think in certain parts
of the world where and I'm not putting
any particular country on the spot here
but I think there are parts of world
where there's an incredible eagerness to
be engaging in the scientific process
right people that are very you know
maybe have felt not included in that in
the recent history and want to get into
it and want to be recognized for their
work they want to be prominent they want
to they want to attract attention they
want to you know make progress so I
think there are motivations that go
beyond simple this you know those sort
of the joy of discovery which I think
you know all science is kind of share
but you know there also are people that
are thinking about you know really kind
of putting their country or their
culture on the map in terms of you know
international recognition so I think
that we're seeing that there is some of
that that's driving the push towards
certain kind of edgier I would say
applications of something like gene
editing and and and that's where we just
need to be be careful and
and I I think that it just requires and
again what I've observed is that there's
a desire on the part of scientists to be
respected by their colleagues to be
accepted by their colleagues so I think
there is a willingness and an interest
in engaging in sort of a international
consensus around what we all consider to
be appropriate use of technologies
that's what that's just my observation
and I think that's what we should be
encouraging because you know culturally
people do approach these things
differently and I would say even the
micro cultures and science are different
we were talking about you know once in a
while I'll speak with someone like
George church I actually the public
conversation with George and George is a
big I talked about you know George is a
big enthusiast of really opening and
opening this filled up heap I think he
would I think it's fair to say he would
be an enthusiast off making directed
manipulations and human sperm and eggs
and he thinks that's his brain I think I
think like a physician first my my first
thing that comes out of my brain is is
this are we ending suffering or you know
how can I first do no harm is the first
thing that comes out of my brain
people's brains are hooked up different
yet I do think that people's cultural
brains are hooked up differently yes
there's a need for provocation whoo yes
there's a need to need to do as you work
to put people on the map but but someone
who's grown up in I grew up in India the
cultural brain you know what we think is
permissible and not permissible is
different we we have different
understanding for instance of where life
begins and that is important and it's so
important that that in fact you know
there will be places there are places
that are drawing lines which then the
lines don't exist across the border and
science will science will move in
accordance to that people will if you if
you want to if you want to make genetic
changes in humans for
as a scientist you will relocate to a
place if you badly wanted to do that
you'll find a place to do it in the
world so I think it's an important it's
that's why I keep coming back to this
question we need to have some sense of
boundary that's my physician brain
speaking first do no harm brain speaking
we have to have some boundaries I don't
know how to reach them but I think
they're important my question appears so
one of the most surprising things about
genetics for me was that effectively 97%
of it of you know DNA itself is
non-coding right and for a while there
was sort of the dead space and you just
assume that introns were there for no
reason and every time I look at the
literature still it's always kind of
vague and confusing and it's like well
you know introns may do something and
they have some rule but I guess my
question is what is the current sort of
attitude towards introns in general with
respect to DNA and do you think CRISPR
will ever become so advanced such that
you know these kinds of concerns are
gonna become necessary and whether we're
gonna understand something else about
that I understand that's kind of
theoretical explain some terminology
first because just widen out the code
the question so one of the things one of
the surprising things that we've learned
that we learned as biologists in fact
this this happens to be the 40th year of
the discovery of splicing gene splicing
and there was a big symposium I I went
to it and so it turns out that in fact
when you gene in the in the genome is
often broken up into parts and their
long parts that are spliced out are
removed when that gene finally becomes a
mature RNA which then gives a protein so
introns are those long parts that are
removed exons are the parts that
ultimately make their way into becoming
protein and the question has to do with
but what about all those introns and
also the other space the intergenic
spaces which had a long time were called
junk DNA that's a term that we inherited
from the 90s with the histories
interesting of that term we inherited
that term for really no good reason
inherited that term from the 1960s and
1970s when our understanding of the
genome was much much more limited my one
thought about this is is for cancer it's
turning out that those introns and that
the intergenic spaces are turning out to
be extraordinarily important not all of
it but much of it
Jennifer you referred to some of this
it's not only important in terms of
regulating gene function it is important
in terms of the way DNA folds in space
and that also regulates gene function
and some parts of it will turn out to be
unimportant there are lots of viruses
that sank their way into the genome
which have been silenced in fact there
are all systems to silenced by these
viruses that might pop their heads up
from the genome so it's an it's it's an
active space but all I can tell you is
that in cancer these previously
non-functional elements of DNA are
turning out to becoming extraordinary
important and by the way how are we
finding out that they're extraordinary
important by using CRISPR by chucking
them out and all of a sudden seeing that
they in fact they influence gene
function in ways that we hadn't thought
about before in cancer that's that's a
that's a huge area of research I don't
know what your thoughts are you don't
have anything to add that's exactly
right
um over here yeah sorry um my question
is regarding the accessibility of gene
therapy and CRISPR systems and I mean
currently a treatment with antisense
oligonucleotides is $400,000 a year and
do you ever see these technologies
helping the entire world or just more
well developed nations
yeah well that's it's it's a great
question it's a really important
question it's something that you know I
am thinking about a lot I think a lot of
people it's this is not a lot of
people's minds and you know whenever
there's a new technology you know you
sort of ask is this doing well you know
what is this doing to really help people
globally versus creating even more
inequalities right and and I think we'd
all like to see it do the former and not
the latter but you know inevitably when
you have new
apologies it's expensive to develop
those and if you want to motivate
companies especially to do the work
that's necessary to create a therapeutic
and go through all all the clinical
trials that are necessary that you know
just the there is a big investment
involved in that that does lead to high
costs of those kinds of treatments how
do you how do you deal with that so one
of the things that I'm involved in right
now is some very active very exciting
discussions with our clinical colleagues
at UC San Francisco so through the
innovative genomics Institute we've been
working on something called the genome
Surgery Center it's in its fledgling
stages but the real idea behind this is
to address exactly the issue that you're
raising is that I think none of us want
to see these technologies develop to
help the point oh one percent right we
really want to see them develop to help
a much larger swath of people and so how
do you do that how you get there and
deal with the realities of the costs of
development and and so there's some
really creative ideas that are coming
out of this we have here of course at UC
Berkeley we have a lot of people that
are that are thinking about this from
the standpoint of economics sociology
history philosophy that we're engaging
with also at Stanford University and so
you know we have this great intellectual
community here in the Bay Area to really
tackle this and I'd really like to see
us take that on very directly and find
ways to develop for example you know
just to give you an example what if you
could find a way to treat a large swath
of people that have a particular genetic
disease using one configuration of a
gene editing technology that wouldn't
require individual clinical trials for
each one this would really reduce costs
so we're looking into ways that we can
streamline that and to do that we really
need to bring together people that are
doing the technology development with
those that are clinicians who they they
know their patients and they know what
the technology needs to be able to do
and so it's you know it's a it's a great
challenge and we're you know I think
we're on the cusp of being able to
tackle it
sickle cell disease is going to be one
of the first examples of this you know
how we tackle this it's really going to
be one of the models because as a
hematoma up taken care of hundreds of
patients young men and women often
african-american men and women with
sickle-cell disease it's a devastating
disease debilitating disease you know
pain crises opioid addiction that comes
with dealing with these pain crises so
it's a tough disease it is a disease
that I think is going to be very
amenable to gene editing based
technologies and transplantation
it is on the cusp of becoming very
amenable to all of these and the
question is how are we going to price
that and will we create gene a gene
therapy over class and a gene therapy
underclass so that's one area that I
think that these people like me are very
actively watching thalassemia is another
area we're on the cusp of these and and
I think those would be models of trying
to figure out can we offer a gene
editing to people who really need it
without excluding them from the using
with cost barriers you had the mic yup I
have a microphone so maybe I'm next
that was a really fascinating discussion
just now because I might from reading
some of your at the book the gene and
also just you know thinking about what
we're going to do the first thing that
comes to mind this was wasn't my initial
thing I was going to talk about but is
the first it wonderful to solve diseases
but is the first disease disease we're
going to solve be a white disease you
know and that's just as an aside based
on what you were talking about here or
you know because and what you presented
about underprivileged or people or where
the money is
etc doctor Doudna but then I was
thinking so whoever's all the answers
IIIi don't think so I think that the
first disease that we're going to solve
I hope is a disease of true suffering
which involves the most amenable which
is most amenable to these technologies
don't you think Jennifer I do I think
that's the first disease I hope so yeah
and won't have been deleted
when we solved that first disease but
then my question was or where I was
fantasizing and let's fantasize for a
minute well our first trip to Mars was a
little bit tough okay
there were a certain group of people
that went there the number of people
died there and didn't really this is the
fantasy right and didn't really and
didn't really didn't really come out the
way they wanted it to but we're going
back to Mars
shouldn't we be readapted we need to
modify our corneas so they perhaps don't
so we're not blind when we get there
through extended space travel maybe we
need to modify our gut so that we can
eat this simple organism that we can
grow on Mars
perhaps we should also address the
issues about our bones so we won't
collapse and break like pretzels when we
get out of Mars there were three
adapting people I say come to our
workshop on astrobiology we're going to
talk okay but now we're pre adapting a
group of people that becomes almost like
a plate of people if you will that are
different from everyone else because
they are going to Mars and and that just
opens up the thought about other plates
of people as well
for different purposes and you know and
and really put you into a territory that
could be quite scary so I can give you
my two bits on this and lots of people
disagree I don't want to go to Mars
right now I'd rather I'd rather focus on
cancer
so you know it just doesn't seem to be
it to me it's the question is yes the
fantasy is lovely my purse lots of
people disagree with me I actually got
into a strange argument with with Jeff
Bezos about going to the moon you know
the moon is a faraway place which is
very toxic for human beings it's not a
great place to carry heavy things to
because it's very expensive it's not a
great place to put anything in there's a
reason it's you know there's a reason
there's no I there's a reason we aren't
going there it has no atmosphere so I'd
rather focus on curing cancer and other
diseases but I understand it that there
is a desire to create a to escape these
earthly coils it doesn't fascinate me as
a question I don't know is it are you
fascinated by the question I'm
fascinated by the question but i but i
but i'm even worth fascinated by asking
asking the audience to ask us one more
question and then we're going to bring
this to a close so can do we have one
more burning question yes hi um thank
you for the great talk first of all I
can already foresee many ways in which
genetic editing could be beneficial to
curing diseases and just ending
suffering as you were mentioning but
what I was wondering is from what I know
and what I learned a lot of mutate
mutations occur just naturally within
like evolution so I was wondering how
yours or what your thoughts were on how
genetic diversity could be affected by
editing and changing our genome well the
short answer is not much anytime soon
right because you know what we're
talking about is making very targeted
changes to the DNA of cells that would
be at least in the in the near term this
is going to be done in people that in in
with cells where it's not a heritable
change right so you're really making a
targeted change in a in a tissue or an
organ and a patient or in blood cells
for example for sickle cell disease and
that sort of
thing but in the if you think you know
in the longer term I still think that
you know there's always going to be a
background number of mutations that are
occurring every cell you know every cell
division leads to some random changes to
DNA that happened due to you know just
sort of various various sort of natural
processes and what we're talking about
here is really just making you know one
individual or maybe just a handful of
individual targeted changes so if you
think about that in the context of of
evolution you know you they're sort of
their sort of intermeshed right and
you're always going to have this
background set of changes that are
happening I think the potential to you
know to control those you know changes
and introduce changes that are going to
have a real impact on disease is is a
powerful one and but I think as you get
from this this conversation today you
know this is not going to happen in you
know in a bar in any kind of a large
sense in the human population anytime
soon on that I think it's a very
important question the question of the
diminishing human diversity and having
respect for human variation is an
incredibly important point I just often
like to give you the following example
privatized eugenics in the hands of in
the hands of the citizens of some parts
of northern India has already created a
dis genic state where because of the
infant because of infant neglect or
because of selective abortion the gender
ratio in these parts in some parts of
the world has now moved to eight hundred
women
eight hundred girls to a thousand boys
it's a profoundly abnormal unnatural
nowhere in human history have we had
eight hundred girls two thousand boys
and that's mainly because of a
combination of reasons but mainly driven
by the idea that one genetic makeup is
inferior quote-unquote to the other
genetic makeup there's no state mandate
in fact the state prevents you from
doing this
but privatized eugenics has already
diminished human diversity radically in
some places so I have to say we have to
be extraordinarily careful even in even
in in handing over to private
individuals private citizens the
capacity to select their own genomes or
the genomes of the actual and this is
such a primeval desire to have the best
children is it primeval human desire and
it is so primeval that left in the hands
of people without cultural guidance
without broad dialogue without
inclusivity without equality there is a
rapid chance of it devolving into a into
a diminishment or a reduction of natural
human variation and diversity thank you
for saying that because it's a very it's
a very important point and we've seen it
happen so we I think we're we're at the
end of our discussion but we want to
thank all of you for coming thank you to
the Chancellor's of UC Berkeley and UCSF
and our hosting and our for our hosts
and and all of you for attending and we
hope that you'll continue the
conversation thank you
[Music]
[Applause]